---
pubDate: 10 Nov 2025 11:00
---

A few matters of style on this website that we would like to keep moving forward. All [articles](/en/blog/on-content-strategy) should follow them without question and if anyone finds them not held in article text, I ask that you let me know immediately. Other types of content may be excused for not adhering to these principles:

- All abbreviations wrapped in `<abbr>` (small caps). We used this style previously on Inter Caetera only for abbreviations that were four letters or longer. This was a bit weird, when we had, for example: "JS, CSS and <abbr>HTML</abbr>." To be consistent, here we will use them always.

- Closely-held em-dash: Inter Caetera was inconsistent with its typography, sometimes using hyphens, sometimes spaced em-dashes (" --- "), other times closely-held em-dashes. For consistency, we will stick to the style of closely-held em-dash (which Merriam Webster says is characteristic of books, which is good I guess). Also, en-dashes for ranges ("2--5 days") and hyphens for (obviously) hyphenation.

- We avoid **bold** in serif-typeset text (articles). Whenever any text calls for bold we will use `<mark>` instead, but we'll try to limit its use because we are not a content-marketing-slop factory.

- We don't use `h1/#` headings in text, they are reserved only for the main title, top-level headings should be `h2/##`.

- We follow the American style of punctuation around quotes: full stops and commas that follow a quotation mark go on the inside of the quotation marks. "'This is a good idea,' she said."
