---
pubDate: 16 Nov 2025
---

On the advice of Rory Sutherland in one of his TikTok reels I have recently read *Obvious Adams* by Robert Updegraff. _Obvious Adams_ is a book mostly about advertising and for advertisers, but actually I think much of the advice found there can apply to any profession whose job it is to understand a product domain and then act upon it. This is similar between programmers and advertisers - we have to understand a domain to build a functioning software solution, advertisers have to understand a domain to make a successful marketing campaign for it.

The book is very short (25 pages) and can no doubt be found now on the internet since it is in the public domain in the US. In my edition there are some additional advice about figuring out "obvious" solutions, which might be useful to relate to programming.

The tests of obviousness:

- This problem when solved will be simple. A good solution to a complicated problem will make the problem simple.

- It should check with human nature. You should be pretty certain that your solution will be accepted by anyone, whom you tell about it. Human nature verifies the solution to any problem.

> "If you do not feel pretty certain that your idea will be understood and accepted by your mother, wife, brothers, sisters, cousins, next-door neighbour, the man who works at the next desk or machine, the mechanic who services your automible, your minister, your barber, the manager of your grocery store, the man who shines your shoes, your Aunt Mary, your secretary, your seat-mae on the 5:29 suburban train, your most outspoken friends - if you don't feel comfortable about explaining your obvious idea to these people - it is probably not obvious."

- You should be able to write it down, in two or three paragraphs and short, two- or three-syllable words. No plan is obvious unless it can be understood by people of average intelligence. Often the attempt to express a plan on paper will outline its flaws or complexities.

- It should explode in people's minds. When you say it, the reaction ought to be "why didn't we think of this before." Obvious ideas are apt to produce this explosive mental reaction.

- It should be implemented in good time. There are some solutions that are only obvious once the ground has been prepared for them to be obvious. Sometimes, some solutions are only going to be obvious once you've already implemented some prerequisites. Other times, you might be late and a more complex solution has become ingrained in people's heads so much that your obvious one is not going to seem like an improvement. "To be ready is to be timely."
