---
pubDate: 29 Jan 2026
---

An idea from "The Rational Reminder" on which they talk about financial planning, and when they discussed financial planning with an engineer who works on their software, they had a few pretty good insights on that.

I think we should consider what it means to be a programmer, a product engineer and a stakeholder in a product company.

So the idea is that you have a goal, you have a way to that goal, and then the execution of the way to the goal.

If the way to the goal is decided to be writing a software program, the programmer (individual contributor) is just going to be someone who is responsible for executing the way to the goal.

A product engineer goes a step earlier and actually checks if the goal that you're setting is actually feasible. We are taking on the responsibility of getting you from your goal to the outcome. So the way to the goal and the execution are on the head of the technical consultant. And a good technical consultant is also going to coach you on how to set a good goal and give you some ideas about what goals are achievable in your budget or in your time. This is where intuition comes into play a lot, because you need intuition for finding out the hypotheses, that you can later prepare estimations or other data for.

The key is that no kind of product engineer is going to actually take the responsibility for your goal. That's something that you as a stakeholder have to take on yourself. If you run a product company, that's what your idea should be.

Our goal as product engineers is to help you find a way to achieve it.
